# Hooks

Normally an interactive application will need to hold state somewhere. In React,
you use special functions called "hooks" to do this. Common built-in hooks
include:

- `React.useState`[[useState]] - used to update and read the state of our component
- `React.useEffect`[[useEffect]] - used to handle side effects within our component
- `React.useContext`[[useContext]]
- `React.useRef`[[useRef]]
- `React.useReducer`[[useReducer]]
- `React.useCallback` [[useCallback]]
- `React.useLayoutEffect` [[useLayoutEffect]]

Each of these is a special function that you can call inside your custom React
component function to store data (like state) or perform actions (or
side-effects).

Each of the hooks has a unique API. Some return a value (like
`React.useRef` and `React.useContext`), others return a pair of values (like
`React.useState` and `React.useReducer`), and others return nothing at all (like
`React.useEffect`).

React also allows us to create custom hooks that can be used across our whole app. Hooks leverage closure and can hence have their own state, side effects, refs and context.

here's an example of a component using a custom hook:

```jsx

function useCounter(initialState) {
    const [count, setCount] = React.useState(initialState);
    return [count, setCount]
}

function Counter() {
  const [count, setCount] = useCounter(0)
  const increment = () => setCount(count + 1)
  return <button onClick={increment}>{count}</button>
}
```

Some argue in React that everything is a hook - while some other argue that everything is a component. Regardless of your stance on this - it's important to understand that the two basically act the same way.

For further info on how the lifecycle of a hook works, refer to [[hook-flow]]

[//begin]: # "Autogenerated link references for markdown compatibility"
[useState]: useState.md "useState"
[useEffect]: useEffect.md "useEffect"
[useContext]: useContext.md "useContext"
[useRef]: useRef.md "useRef"
[useReducer]: useReducer.md "useReducer"
[useCallback]: useCallback.md "useCallback"
[useLayoutEffect]: useLayoutEffect.md "useLayoutEffect"
[hook-flow]: hook-flow.md "Hook Flow"
[//end]: # "Autogenerated link references"